- An effective resume is concise.
However, it's packed with information
that spotlights your skills, experience, and achievements
in a way that draws the recruiter's attention
and gets you into an interview.
Here are some tips that will help you write
your first resume for a software development position.
I recommend using a top-down approach
when constructing your resume,
starting with its major sections and their layout,
almost like you were designing a webpage.
I typically include sections that list my experience,
skills, education, certifications, and personal information.
Here's a layout that you might use
to organize these sections,
which places the sections a recruiter will be
most interested in towards the top.
It starts with the bold header
and then lists your work experience,
followed by your education in the body of the document.
Then in the sidebar, it adds sections for your skills,
certifications, and contact information.
If necessary, you can rearrange these sections
to play to your strengths.
For example, if your work experience is very limited,
you might place the education section towards the top.
Or if you don't have any certifications,
you'd remove that section.
Once you have the layout established,
you can start to build out the contents of each section
which should be concise, neatly organized,
and packed with condensed information
about your achievements.
Here is an example of some content you might use
in the work experience section.
I won't read through each of these bullets
but you'll notice how much information is compacted
into each one.
Each bullet gives a synopsis of what you did,
the technologies you used to do it,
and a quick quantitative summary of the results.
You'll want to use this pattern
when crafting any bullet point
for your resume to keep it concise, clear, and impactful.
Write what you achieved,
the tools and techniques you used to do it,
and then quantify the results,
all using the fewest amount of words possible.
It doesn't need to follow perfect grammar rules
but it should communicate clearly.
I've spent up to an hour
just getting one bullet point perfect.
When writing your resume, follow these three best practices.
First, make sure you proofread it for mistakes
multiple times.
If possible, have someone else review it.
You'll be using the document throughout your career
so you want to make it the highest quality possible.
Also, don't list anything on your resume
that you can't speak to in an interview.
If an interview assesses you on a technology
listed on your resume,
and you're clearly not able to speak to it,
your chances of getting the position are slim.
I've seen it happen.
Finally, every pixel of your resume is valuable real estate
and you have to treat it that way.
Especially the first page
if you have a lot of job experience to list.
You need to strategize about how to fill those pixels
with the best content that will get you noticed
by a recruiter and into an interview.
Once you've built the first version of your resume,
it's only the beginning.
For each position you apply to,
you'll want to tailor it
as much as possible to the position.
If you're submitting resumes and not getting interviews,
you'll want to go back to the drawing board
and revisit your resume, starting with a clean slate.
It can take a little trial and error
to find the right layout and content that gets you noticed.
And here's my final tip: set aside time each quarter
to update your resume with what you've achieved.
It's a great way to reflect, review your achievements,
and it will keep your resume current.